BIP3: Updated BIP Process (#1712)
bitcoin/bips: bip-0003.md

currency. Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard.
Some BIPs describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g.,
[BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki)), or other information relevant to the Bitcoin community. However, any topics related to
the Bitcoin protocol, peer-to-peer network, and client software may be acceptable.

BIPs are intended to be a means for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

The scope of the BIP
repository is limited to BIPs that do not oppose the fundamental principle that Bitcoin constitutes a peer-to-peer
electronic cash system for the bitcoin currency.

### BIP Ownership

Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors and represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are
expected to foster discussion, address feedback and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of
their proposal within the Bitcoin community.

#### Authors and Shepherds

> Authors may want additional support with the BIP process after writing an initial draft. In that case, they may assign

Reviewer: "support with" -> "help with" or "support for"

source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and
allows any community member to retain a complete copy of the archive easily.

The BIPs repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond
providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to the audience.
There is no formal or informal decision body that governs Bitcoin development or decides acceptance of BIPs. Bitcoin
development emerges from the participation of shareholders across the ecosystem.

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

Authors may choose to submit BIPs in MediaWiki or Markdown[^markdown] format.

Each BIP must have a _Preamble_, an _Abstract_, and a _Copyright_ section. Authors should consider all issues in the
following list and address each as appropriate. For some BIPs, some concerns may not warrant a dedicated section.

* Preamble -- Headers containing metadata about the BIP (see the section [BIP header preamble](#bip-header-preamble)
  below).
* Abstract -- A short description of the technical issue being addressed.

> * Motivation -- The motivation is critical for BIPs. It should clearly explain what issue the BIP addresses, and how the

Reviewer: This seems to overlap a bit with the Abstract on the previous line. Maybe emphasize more the "why" rather than the "what"

Author: Thanks good catch. Rewrote the Motivation description.

  existing situation is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves.
* Specification -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The
  specification should be detailed enough to enable any Bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.

> * Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular

Reviewer: maybe avoid the word "motivated" here as it is also a section title

Author: Slightly amended this sentence.

volunteers within four weeks.

##### Deployed ↦ Closed

A BIP may evolve from Deployed to Closed when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may initiate this
Status update by announcing it to the mailing list, and proceed if no objections have been raised for four weeks.

##### Closed ↦ Draft

The Closed status is generally intended to be a final status for BIPs.

If BIP authors decide to make another attempt at a previously Closed BIP, it is generally recommended to create a new
proposal. (Obviously, the authors may borrow any amount of inspiration or actual text from any prior BIPs as licensing
permits.) The authors should take special care to address the issues that caused the prior attempt’s abandonment. Even
if the prior attempt had been assigned a number, the new BIP will generally be assigned a distinct number, unless it is
obvious that the new attempt directly continues work on the same idea, in which case it may be reasonable to return the
Closed BIP to Draft status.

### Changelog

To help implementers understand updates to a BIP, any changes after it has reached Complete must be tracked with version,

> date, and description in a Changelog section. The version number is inspired by semantic versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH).

Reviewer: Suggest stipulating that entries be ordered by most recent first / descending date (i.e. like in https://keepachangelog.com/)

is advanced to Complete, it is up to the Bitcoin community to evaluate, adopt, ignore, or reject a BIP. Individual
Bitcoin projects are encouraged to publish a list of BIPs they implement. A good example of this at the time of writing
this BIP can be observed in Bitcoin Core’s [doc/bips.md](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bips.md)
file.

### Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to new owners. In general, it would be preferable to
retain the original authors of the transferred BIP, but that is up to the original authors. A good reason to transfer
ownership is because the original authors no longer have the time or interest in updating it or following through with
the BIP process, or are unreachable or unresponsive. A bad reason
to transfer ownership is because someone doesn't agree with the direction of the BIP. The community tries to build
consensus around a BIP, but if that's not possible, rather than fighting over control, the dissenters should supply a
competing BIP.

If someone is interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, they should send an email asking to take over, addressed to the

> original authors, the BIP Editors, and the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. If the authors do not respond in a timely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
original authors, the BIP Editors, and the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. If the authors are unreachable or do not respond in a timely
```

Reviewer: I see (thanks!) By "unreachable", I wanted to mean that we don't know how to reach them.

Author: We should have an email address for every BIP Author, but either way it’s a fine addition

* CC-BY-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
* CC-BY-SA-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)
* MIT: [Expat/MIT/X11 license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

#### Not acceptable licenses

All licenses not explicitly included in the above lists are not acceptable terms for a Bitcoin Improvement Proposal.
However, BIPs predating the acceptance of this BIP were allowed under other terms, and should use these abbreviations
when no other license is granted:

* PD: Released into the public domain
* OPL: [Open Publication License, version 1.0](http://opencontent.org/openpub/)

## BIP Editors

The current BIP editors are:

* Bryan Bishop ([kanzure@gmail.com](mailto:kanzure@gmail.com))
* Jon Atack ([jon@atack.com](mailto:jon@atack.com))
* Luke Dashjr ([luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org](mailto:luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org))
* Mark "Murch" Erhardt ([murch@murch.one](mailto:murch@murch.one))
* Olaoluwa Osuntokun ([laolu32@gmail.com](mailto:laolu32@gmail.com))
* Ruben Somsen ([rsomsen@gmail.com](mailto:rsomsen@gmail.com))

> ### BIP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow

Author: Took care of that!

- Most sections are declared optional, it is up to the authors and audience to judge whether all relevant topics have
  been comprehensively addressed and which topics require a designated section to do so.
- Layer header is optional for Specification BIPs or Informational BIPs, as it does not make sense for all BIPs.[^layer]
- The comment system is abolished. Comments-URI and Comment-Summary headers are dropped from the preamble, Comments as
  an aspect of the process are discontinued.[^comments]
- Process BIPs are living documents that do not ossify and may be modified indefinitely.
- Titles may now be up to 50 characters.
- The Discussions-To header is dropped as it has never been used in any BIP.
- The Post-History header is replaced with the Discussion header.
- The Status field is no longer modeled around the workflow of consensus changes.
- Status field values are reduced from nine to four:
  - Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn are gathered up into Closed.[^closed]
  - Final and Active are collapsed into Deployed.
  - The remaining statuses are Draft, Complete, Deployed, and Closed.

> - BIPs no longer get rejected solely on grounds of not making progress for three years.[^rejection]

Reviewer: Maybe

```suggestion
- A BIP in Draft or Complete status may no longer be rejected (i.e. closed) solely on grounds of not making progress for three years.[^rejection]
```

(Also update this in the PR description)

Reviewer 2: This wording is incorrect. The current text of the BIP permits movement of BIPs from Draft or Complete status to Closed by any community member, which was the exact problem shot down before.

> - A BIP may be set to Closed by its authors, or by anyone if it appears to have stopped making progress for at least a

Reviewer: Can a Complete or Deployed PR be closed, and under what conditions.

```suggestion
- A BIP in Draft status may be set to Closed by its authors, or by anyone if it appears to have stopped making progress for at least a
```

(Also update this in the PR description)

  License: <Identifier(s) of acceptable license(s)>
* License-Code: <Identifier(s) for Code under different acceptable license(s)>
* Discussion: <Noteworthy discussion threads in "yyyy-mm-dd: URL" format>
* Version: <MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH>
* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

##### Header Descriptions

* BIP — The assigned number of the BIP. Please use "?" before a number has been assigned by the BIP Editors.
* Layer — The layer of Bitcoin the BIP applies to using the BIP classification defined in [BIP 123](bip-0123.mediawiki).
* Authors — The names (or pseudonyms) and email addresses of all authors of the BIP. The format of each authors header
  value must be

      Random J. User <address@dom.ain>

  Multiple authors are recorded on separate lines:

      Authors: Random J. User <address@dom.ain>
               Anata Sample <anata@domain.example>

* Shepherds — Additional owners of the BIP that are not authors. The Shepherds header uses the same format as the
  Authors header. See the [BIP Ownership](#bip-ownership) section above.
* Status — The stage of the workflow of the proposal. See the [Workflow](#workflow) section below.

> * Type — See the [Bip types](#bip-types) section below for a description of the three BIP types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Type — See the [Bip Types](#bip-types) section below for a description of the three BIP types.
```

(in general, check that 68c21030804e3a5bfb8455f327dfa2d47f17dfd9 doesn't introduce inconsistencies)

  conversation. Multiple discussions should be listed on separate lines.
* Version — The current version number of this BIP. See the [Changelog](#changelog) section below.
* Requires — A list of existing BIPs the new proposal depends on. If multiple BIPs
  are required, they should be listed in one line separated by a comma and space (e.g., "1, 2").
* Replaces and Superseded-By — BIPs may have a Replaces header that contains the number of an older BIP that it renders
  obsolete. In turn, a Superseded-By header indicates that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by the later document with
  the provided number.

#### Auxiliary Files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams and source code. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory
for that BIP named `bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number zero-padded to four digits. File names in the subdirectory
do not need to adhere to a specific convention.

### BIP Types

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with

>   it. Specification BIPs must have a Specification section, should have a Backward Compatibility section, and should come with or refer to a reference implementation and test vectors.

Reviewer: Per line 102, for clarity (also, aren't backward compat sections required, or only encouraged?)

```suggestion
  it. Specification BIPs must have a Specification section and a Backward Compatibility section, and for "Complete" status must include or refer to a reference implementation and test vectors.
```

versions (which should be rare after a BIP is Complete, and only happen in well-grounded exceptional cases to a BIP that
is Deployed). The MINOR version is incremented whenever the specification of the BIP is changed or extended in a
backward-compatible way. The PATCH version is incremented for other changes to the BIP that are noteworthy (bug fixes,
test vectors, important clarifications, etc.). Version 1.0.0 is used to label the promotion to
Complete. A Changelog section may be introduced during the Draft phase to record significant changes (using versions 0.x.y).

Example:

> __Changelog__
>
> * __2.0.0__ (2025-01-22):
>     * Introduce a breaking change in the specification to fix a bug.
> * __1.1.0__ (2025-01-17):
>     * Add a backward compatible extension to the BIP.
> * __1.0.1__ (2025-01-15):
>     * Clarify an edge case and add corresponding test vectors.
> * __1.0.0__ (2025-01-14):
>     * Complete planned work on the BIP.

After a BIP receives a Changelog, the
Preamble must indicate the latest version in the Version header. The Changelog highlights revisions to BIPs to human readers. A single

> BIP shall not recommend more than one variant of an idea at the same time. An an updated or

Reviewer: double "an"

```suggestion
BIP shall not recommend more than one variant of an idea at the same time. An updated or
```

Maybe also `s/An updated or competing variant/A different or competing/`:

- BIPs may have bugfixes or changes (cf top example in Changelog section), and;

- `Process BIPs are living documents that do not ossify and may be modified indefinitely.`

this BIP can be observed in Bitcoin Core’s [doc/bips.md](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bips.md)
file.

### Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to new owners. In general, it would be preferable to
retain the original authors of the transferred BIP, but that is up to the original authors. A good reason to transfer
ownership is because the original authors no longer have the time or interest in updating it or following through with
the BIP process, or are unreachable or unresponsive. A bad reason
to transfer ownership is because someone doesn't agree with the direction of the BIP. The community tries to build
consensus around a BIP, but if that's not possible, rather than fighting over control, the dissenters should supply a
competing BIP.

If someone is interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, they should send an email asking to take over, addressed to the
original authors, the BIP Editors, and the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. If the authors are unreachable or do not respond in a timely

> manner (e.g., two weeks), the BIP editors will make a unilateral decision whether to appoint the applicants as

Reviewer: Two weeks seems quite short. Maybe four or eight?

<pre>
  BIP: 3
  Title: Updated BIP Process

>   Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>

Reviewer 3: `<murch@murch.one>` doesn't show up when github displays the file. [BIP 348](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0348.md), [BIP 349](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0349.md) and [BIP 379](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0379.md) also have this problem. Making it a code block (` ``` ... ``` `) seems to work, otherwise replacing them with `&lt;` and `&gt;` would be an option if this section is kept as a `<pre>` block.

Author: Thank for pointing this out. Our formatting checker currently requires the tags `<pre>` and `</pre>` to encapsulate the preamble. That means that we would either need to have different formats for markdown and mediawiki, or change our formatting requirements and adjust all existing BIPs.

For the moment, I have opened #1759 to fix the unrendered email addresses in the existing markdown BIPs and fixed it here by using the HTML Entity Names as you proposed.

Author: Unfortunately, using the HTML Entity Names causes the formatting checker to fail, so this will need a more invasive fix. :-/
Still working on the approach.

Author: This is hopefully to be resolved by #1759, after which I’ll update here.

  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0003
  Status: Draft
  Type: Process
  Created: 2025-01-09
  License: BSD-2-Clause
  Post-History: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2

>                 https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/59fa94cea6f70e02b1ce0da07ae230670730171c.camel@timruffing.de/#t

Reviewer 3: These links (Post-History and Comments-URI) aren't rendered as clickable, which seems a little lame; and changing `<pre>` to a code block doesn't help here. Would it make sense to move this out of the header into its own section (perhaps near the "Changelog" section? or "Related Works" or "Acknowledgements" though neither are specified here) looking something like:

```
## Discussion

 * 2024-05-14 https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
 * 2024-04-02 https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/59fa94cea6f70e02b1ce0da07ae230670730171c.camel@timruffing.de/#t
```

Author: I prefer for the discussion links to be in the preamble, as it’s accessible and having a section for it would feel like overkill, but I do agree that it would be nice for them to be rendered as links. Perhaps we can just exempt just the URLs from code formatting in the preamble?

Author: Given that the email address doesn’t get rendered presumably because it was interpreted as HTML, I tried to use HTML to define the URLs as links which seems to work.

Reviewer 3: I thought having a section was appealing both because it encourages you to read the current proposal first before diving into the history, and, for proposals with a lot of discussion, makes it easier to include all that discussion without being a huge upfront distraction.

Maybe depends a bit on whether you view the link as helping with process alignment ("Did they post to the list before requesting a BIP number? Yes? Great!") or as further background information for readers/implementors ("What was the thought process behind this?"). eg BIP 340 has a link to the original announcement as per process requirements, but doesn't have a link to the additional discussion from 2019-05-06 (see BIP 341) that resulted in the pubkeys being 32 bytes instead of 33 bytes. I think having links in the preamble/header encourages minimising them, while having a section later in the document would encourage providing more info; the latter seems like it would be more useful to me, but YMMV.

Doing html markup manually feels like it would just make the source document harder to read/write; probably better to just copy&paste the url in that case; it's not really that big of a deal.

Author: I have considered this further, and have decided to retain the Discussion header over a Discussion section. While the argument that a first-time reader may first skim the BIP before taking a look at Discussions linked to in the section sounds compelling, for power users of the repository such as BIP Editors and other frequent contributors to the process having the links in the Preamble represents a significant accessibility improvement.

Author: @ajtowns: Do you think it would be worth mentioning an optional "References" section that authors can use to link to related reading material?

Reviewer 3: There are 37 bips that have that section (compared to 29 that have a Post-History header), so it could be worthwhile to document it. BIP 8 links to its mailing list discussion via its References section rather than having a Post-History header. However, if you want to encourage links to prior discussion of the bip to be in the header, might be better to not document the References section, authors who want to add further references can probably figure out how to add a section for it without much handholding?

documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

The scope of the BIP
repository is limited to BIPs that do not oppose the fundamental principle that Bitcoin constitutes a peer-to-peer
electronic cash system for the bitcoin currency.

### BIP Ownership

Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors and represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are
expected to foster discussion, address feedback and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of
their proposal within the Bitcoin community.

#### Authors and Shepherds

Authors may want additional help with the BIP process after writing an initial draft. In that case, they may assign
one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand-in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the
document. They support the authors in advancing the proposal, or act as a point of contact for the BIP in the absence of the
authors. Shepherds may perform the role of Authors for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.
Shepherds share ownership of the BIP at the discretion of the Authors.

> 

Reviewer 4: Apologies if I’m late to this review opportunity. This is my first bip 'review' I’m responding to the Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #341 email.

If “Shepherd” is meant to signify “Secondary Owner”, for simplicity why not use that exact term? This would remove any need for readers to look up the meaning of Shepherd in this context.

If Secondary Owner isn’t an option, have alternatives like “Delegate” or “Trustee” been considered? These terms have clear, widely understood definitions and, if applicable, could enhance clarity.

Thank you for considering my suggestions.

> 

Author: Thank you @bitcoin3us for sharing your thoughts. I have revised my proposal to use "Deputy" instead of "Shepherd". Please let me know if that sounds right to you.

rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.

At that point, the BIP should be considered final and any breaking changes to the BIP should be proposed as a new
separate BIP.[^new-BIP]

##### Process BIPs

A Process BIP may change status from Complete to Deployed when it achieves rough consensus on the mailing list. Such a
proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been open to discussion on the development mailing list for at least
one month, and no person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed or obstructive objections
may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. Deployed Process BIPs may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification has
rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

#### Closed[^closed]

A BIP that is _not in active use_, may be labeled Closed when its authors have stopped working on it, no longer
recommend the proposed approach, or no longer pursue adoption of their Complete proposal. The reason for moving the

> proposal to Closed should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.

Reviewer 5: I agree with the *reasons* listed, but ultimately the authors should be the only people with the authority to close a BIP, unless the author is unresponsive for an extended period of time.

Reviewer 2: Critically, "active use" is never defined in this BIP, and by one reading anyone/everyone is granted the authority to make the determination for themselves what active use means.

Can we please have a permanent "this BIP may or may not receive updates in the future, but should never be retired" state?

Author: @kallewoof: The subsections of the "Closed" section go into detail on how proposals are moved to Closed from the other states and who is eligible to do so under which circumstances. Specifically, the authors can generally move their own proposals to Closed, unless it has already been recommended to the community and other people want to proceed, or a proposal is moved to closed because it has stopped making progress and the authors either do not wish to further pursue it or do not reply when contacted.

It seems to me that an author not responding to a personally addressed email for four weeks after not working on their proposal for a year may fit your description of "unresponsive for an extended period". If that is not the case, please let me know how this aspect of the proposal could be improved.

Reviewer 3: The definition here doesn't seem to entirely match the `Draft->Closed` and `Complete->Closed` conditions below, which are a bit more specific. Maybe it would be clearer to write something like:

#### Closed

A BIP that is of historical interest only, and is not being actively worked on, promoted or in active use, should be marked as Closed. Transitions involving the Closed state are:

 * Draft ↦ Closed
  BIP authors may decide on their own to change their BIP’s status from Draft to Closed. If a Draft BIP stops making progress, sees accumulated feedback unaddressed, or otherwise appears stalled for a year, the community may move the BIP to Closed unless the authors assert that they intend to continue work within four weeks of being contacted.

  * Complete ↦ Closed
  BIPs that had attained the Complete status, i.e., that had been recommended for adoption, may be moved to Closed per the authors’ announcement to the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. However, if someone volunteers to adopt the proposal within four weeks, they become the BIP's author or shepherd, and the BIP will remain Complete instead. A BIP can also be moved to Closed by the community if it has had Complete status for at least one year, here is no evidence of it being in active use, and its authors do not object or fail to respond, unless a new author volunteers within four weeks.

  * Deployed ↦ Closed
  A BIP may evolve from Deployed to Closed when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may initiate this Status update by announcing it to the mailing list, and proceed if no objections have been raised for four weeks.

  * Closed ↦ Draft
  The Closed status is generally intended to be a final status for BIPs, and if BIP authors decide to make another attempt at a previously Closed BIP, it is generally recommended to create a new proposal. (Obviously, the authors may borrow any amount of inspiration or actual text from any prior BIPs as licensing permits.) The authors should take special care to address the issues that caused the prior attempt’s abandonment. Even if the prior attempt had been assigned a number, the new BIP will generally be assigned a distinct number. However if it is obvious that the new attempt directly continues work on the same idea, in which case it may be reasonable to return the Closed BIP to Draft status.

Author: Thanks, what you propose makes the section clearer. I took all of this with a small adjustment in the last sentence:

```diff
-However if it is obvious that the new attempt directly continues work on the same idea, 
-in which case it may be reasonable to return the Closed BIP to Draft status.
+However, if it is obvious that the new attempt directly continues work on the same idea,
+it may be reasonable to return the Closed BIP to Draft status.
```

Reviewer 2: @murchandamus The section you reference lists examples, not a definition. This may seem overly legalistic in interpretation, but these are standards (or the closest thing bitcoin has to standards). Semantics matter.

"deployed to mainnet, activated softfork, or rough consensus demonstrated" are given as examples. No indication is given that these are exhaustive, or what other constraints might be in place. No definition at all is offered up. A random passer-by could mark a BIP as Closed due to inactivity because vibes, or because it's Tuesday, or because they feel like it, and that would be in strict compliance with the rules given here.

It would help if "active use" were eliminated entirely. There are BIPs for which determination of "active use" is nontrivial and perhaps even subjective. BIP 98, for example, hasn't been updated in years, and is not used in any bitcoin consensus code. But there are multiple non-consensus-code implementations outside of the upstream bitcoin core repository and in bitcoin-adjacent projects, including a patch set that adds a built-in stratum server, and consensus features inside of Blockstream's Liquid product. The BIP isn't final because it could still see changes before it sees more permanent adoption, e.g. in upstreaming the stratum server. Nor should it be retired due to the mere passage of time--I've had to object to multiple attempts to do so over the years.

Maybe you think it's adequate that a BIP be closed if someone can't be reached in 4 weeks. For me, I am balancing multiple projects of much higher priority on a day-to-day basis, and it is entirely possible a single email could get lost in that, especially given the noise of GitHub notifications (and the fact that I was previously *not tagged* on pull requests to close these BIPs). It is stressful and aggravating.

Reviewer: Fair enough, "active use" is employed at least 6 times in this BIP and could use a definition at the top. 

Maybe the multiple "four weeks" periods in this BIP could be six or eight weeks instead, not sure what others think.

Reviewer 2: What about cases, like real example I gave, where indefinite status in the Draft stage is *exactly what’s desired* and moving to Closed is an anti feature?

Author: I think what is being missed here, is that the situation would be extremely simple, if we were to take a legalistic approach. BIP2 states      that a BIP that hasn’t made progress for three years should be rejected:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/045cba85-b239-44fe-9ed0-46e035d272b5)

The Bitcoin Process is not a legal framework. It’s a set of          guidelines that help align the authors’ and editors’ expectations, and aim to provide information to the Bitcoin developer community. The status field especially          highlights to the audience which BIPs they may want to review,               implement, or otherwise pay attention to. The point of the discussed         rules is to save the audience time looking into BIPs that nobody is          working on.

I have been pondering how to define active use, but it might be more of      a "I know it when I see it" sort of thing. The opposite, "not being in       active use" may be easier to define, but either way, it boils down to        some stakeholder making a cogent claim that something is        being used.

BIPs do not only track consensus changes. If a BIP is in active use by       any Bitcoin project, it should be updated to Deployed.

 If a BIP has not been relevant to the Bitcoin ecosystem for years and        there is no _active effort_ going into changing that, it _should be          Closed_. That does not mean that the BIP is going to be deleted, nor         does it preclude anyone from continuing to refer to the document. It         just means that _in the Bitcoin developer community_ nobody is actively      working on advancing this BIP, and it is currently not deployed or           otherwise actively used by any Bitcoin projects.
 If a BIP is in active use by a Bitcoin-adjacent project or in Bitcoin-adjacent ecosystems, preferably a corresponding community should host        the document in their own documentation. If a BIP is broadly used        and for historical reasons the authoritative source is the BIPs              repository, I don’t see a problem with it being set to Complete in the       BIPs Repository with a note at the top or in the Changelog describing        the situation and suggesting that it should not be Closed for historical     reasons. It’s not like we have grandfathered in things before. I’d even be open to setting it to Deployed with such a note.
 
 Maybe you are also missing why I’m introducing this new rule in the          first place. We have several open pull requests that propose closing         BIPs under the "three years of no progress" rule. My idea was that the       new rule that states "one year of no progress and authors do not respond     when contacted" would give us standing to close pull request #1008 and keep BIP 117 open, because that seems to be what we have been doing for the past few years anyway. OTOH, it still allows us to move BIPs that actually nobody uses, nobody is working on, and nobody is pushing for to Closed. E.g., allowing us to move forward with merging #1009 and #792.

I would like to find an end to this debate. In order of preference, this could be achieved by adopting a superior guideline how      to handle the situation (e.g., by someone proposing a better definition for active use, and/or providing a superior approach to the trade-off            between being able to tidy out abandoned proposals from yore but also respecting if authors continue to be invested, sticking to my current proposal of "keep open BIPs whose authors continue to be invested", or simply applying BIP2 as written. The option that I’m not interested in, is spending another 5–10 hours on a pointless debate when I’m trying to do you a favor. Please      let me know what you would prefer, because like you, I     have more useful things to spend my time on.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I’m aware of why BIP 3 exists. I believe I’m the one who instigated this process, when it was identified that BIP 2 had the unintended ability to expire active BIPs. Some of those pull requests you mention were against my BIPs. I’m literally the first author to respond to #1008 where I requested the issue (not the BIP, but #1008) to be closed. You can close that issue. I don’t know why it is still open.

If you are asking my opinion, I think we shouldn’t have a Closed state. There should perhaps be a “Retracted” that only the author should be allowed to move a BIP into, and which could be objected to by any community member—this would be for proposals that were never more than a proposal and the authors explicitly want to remove from consideration. Even that I don’t think is strictly necessary.

I do not see the value of a BIP repository being a list of active and relevant BIPs. That is typically not the purpose of a standards repository, and introduces a whole new political angle of people wanting to influence what is or isn’t on the “active” list. It is a place to hash out agreement over ideas and implementations, but not their adoption or perceived continuing relevance.

Author: > Yes, I’m aware of why BIP 3 exists. I believe I’m the one who instigated this process, when it was identified that BIP 2 had the unintended ability to expire active BIPs.

Mark, not every Bitcoin-related initiative is about you. I believe this concern has been sufficiently addressed. I will not spend more time on this.

Reviewer 5: > By the currently-active BIP 2 rules, https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1008 should be merged, as BIP 117 should be marked as Expired. You're free to disagree with the process of course, but as per the current process, it is really not up to you to reject it being marked Expired.

Yes, but that's not at all why that rule was put in place in the first place. Rejection should not be a mere timer. These are after all _proposals_ and I don't really see a reason to gate keep them in this manner, which is why I am not entirely happy with the "closed" idea either. If the argument is that a swarm of hypothetical engineers suddenly appear out of nowhere and decide to implement every bitcoin feature from scratch without consulting anyone (thus needing to know whether something is "active" or not), I would say that the swarm should learn to communicate.

Author: I updated the guidance regarding the Closed state to indicate that Complete BIPs can only be moved to Closed by their authors, and may stay open indefinitely. "Complete" indicates that the planned work on the BIP is concluded, and that the authors are recommending it for adoption, however, such BIPs may still be amended as issues are discovered when they are being deployed. I hope that these changes in combination with advancing the above discussed BIPs to Proposed (before BIP 3 activates) or Complete after BIP 3 activates) resolves your concern.

```
  BIP: 3
  Title: Updated BIP Process
  Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0003
  Status: Draft
  Type: Process
  Created: 2025-01-09
  License: BSD-2-Clause
  Post-History: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
                https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/59fa94cea6f70e02b1ce0da07ae230670730171c.camel@timruffing.de/#t
  Requires: 123
  Replaces: 2
```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces [BIP 2](bip-0002.mediawiki) with a streamlined process, and may be amended to
address the evolving needs of the BIP process.

## Motivation

BIP 2 was written in 2016.
This BIP revisits aspects of the BIP 2 process
that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned to the BIP Editor role, delineates the

> BIP Types more clearly, and generalizes the BIP process to meet the community’s use of the repository.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
BIP types more clearly, and generalizes the BIP process to meet the community’s use of the repository.
```
Capitalization was inconsistent

## Fundamentals

### What is a BIP?

> BIPs cover the range of interests of the Bitcoin[^capitalization] community. The main topic is information and technologies that support and expand the utility of the bitcoin

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
BIPs are improvement proposals for Bitcoin[^capitalization] that cover the range of interests of the community. The main topic is information and technologies that support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
```
The section starts with the question "What is a BIP?" but there was some basic information missing in the answer. This may be a bit more clear.

authors. Deputies may perform the role of Authors for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.
Deputies share ownership of the BIP at the discretion of the Authors.

### What is the Significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what Bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP authors to the Bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more Bitcoin clients or other related
software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the Bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

### What is the Purpose of the BIPs Repository?

The [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/) serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals.
Through its high visibility, it facilitates the community-wide consideration of BIPs and provides a well-established
source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and
allows any community member to retain a complete copy of the archive easily.

> The BIPs repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond

Reviewer 6: The footnote is connected to "acceptance" but then only talks about "adoption". The difference between these two (if any) is currently not clear to me.

providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to the audience.

> There is no formal or informal decision body that governs Bitcoin development or decides acceptance of BIPs. Bitcoin

Reviewer 6: Here the word "acceptance" is slightly confusing. It can also be misread to mean "accepting a proposal as a BIP" (for which we do have sort of an informal decision body) rather than "the community actively starts using the proposal".

> development emerges from the participation of shareholders across the ecosystem.

Reviewer 6: I understand why this sentence was added, but it seems like secondary information that is not integral to the core question of the paragraph and may be more suited for a footnote.

* License and License-Code — These headers list SPDX License Identifier(s) of the acceptable licenses under which the
  BIP and corresponding code are available. See the [BIP Licensing](#bip-licensing) section below for a description of
  the Licenses and their SPDX License Identifiers. If there are multiple acceptable licenses, each should be on a
  separate line.
* Discussion — The Discussion header points the audience to relevant discussions of the BIP, e.g., the mailing list
  thread in which the idea for the BIP was discussed, a thread where a new version of the BIP was presented, or relevant
  discussion threads on other platforms. Entries take the format "yyyy-mm-dd: URL", e.g., `2009-01-09:
  https://www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html`, using the date and URL of the start of the
  conversation. Multiple discussions should be listed on separate lines.
* Version — The current version number of this BIP. See the [Changelog](#changelog) section below.
* Requires — A list of existing BIPs the new proposal depends on. If multiple BIPs
  are required, they should be listed in one line separated by a comma and space (e.g., "1, 2").

> * Replaces — BIP authors may place the numbers of one or more prior BIPs in the Replaces header to recommend that their

Reviewer 6: I realize it is meant as just a recommendation for replacement, but to a more casual BIP reader "replaces" will sound very assertive. If anyone can suggest that they're replacing any BIP, I can see some potential for this getting controversial when it is recommended that BIP X replaces BIP Y while not everyone agrees (e.g. BIP352 replaces BIP47). "Proposes-to-replace" may be more neutral.

do not need to adhere to a specific convention.

### BIP Types

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules describing a new feature or affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing characteristic of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with
  it. Specification BIPs must have a Specification section, must have a Backward Compatibility section (if incompatibilities are introduced), and can only be advanced to Complete after they contain or refer to a reference implementation and test vectors.
* An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, or provides general guidelines or other information to the
  Bitcoin community.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to topics other than the Bitcoin protocol and Bitcoin implementations.
  They often require community consensus and are typically binding for the corresponding process. Examples include

>   procedures, guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP Process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  procedures, guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP process.
```
Capitalization was inconsistent

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for Bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have authors—people who write the BIP,
gather feedback, shepherd the discussion in the appropriate forums, and finally recommend a mature proposal to the
community.

![Status Diagram](bip-0003/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

After having an idea, the authors should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in this
BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects. Minor improvements
and matters concerning only a single project usually do not require standardization and should instead be brought up directly to
the relevant project.

The authors should first research whether an idea has been considered before. Ideas in Bitcoin are often rediscovered,
and prior related discussions may inform the authors of the issues that may arise in its progression. After some investigation,

> the novelty of an idea can be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
the novelty and viability of an idea should be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing
```
Maybe we can word this more strongly. Too often do people show up out of the blue with a BIP, usually with questionable quality. It would be good to have more grounds be able to push back and say "hey, get feedback first".

> the novelty of an idea can be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
the novelty and viability of an idea should be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing
```
Maybe we can word this more strongly. Too often do people show up out of the blue with a BIP, usually with questionable quality. It would be good to have more grounds be able to push back and say "hey, get feedback first".

overall proposal.

### Progression through BIP Statuses

The following sections refer to BIP Status Field values. The BIP Status Field is defined in the Header Preamble
specification above.

#### Draft

After fleshing out the proposal further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the authors
should open a pull request to the [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The document must adhere to the
formatting requirements specified above and should be provided as a file named with a working title of the form
"bip-title.[md|mediawiki]". The authors must not self-assign a number to their proposal.

BIPs that (1) adhere to the formatting requirements, (2) are on-topic, and (3) have materially progressed beyond the
ideation phase, e.g., by generating substantial public discussion and commentary from diverse contributors, by
independent Bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the authors working for an extended period toward
improving the proposal based on community feedback, will be assigned a number by a BIP editor. The BIP editors should

> delay number assignment when they perceive a proposal being met with lack of interest: number assignment facilitates the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
not assign a number when they perceive a proposal being met with lack of interest: number assignment facilitates the
```
This seems more accurate than "delay" since the delay could potentially be forever.

improvement, is clear, comprehensive, and is
ready for adoption by the Bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s status to Complete to indicate that they
recommend adoption, implementation, or deployment of the BIP. Where applicable, the authors must ensure that any
proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Specification BIPs must come with or refer to a working reference implementation and comprehensive test vectors before they can be moved to Complete. Subsequently, the BIP’s content should only be
adjusted in minor details, e.g., to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill omissions in the specification, add
test vectors for edge cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is being adopted.

A Complete BIP can only move to Deployed or Closed. Any necessary changes to the specification should be minimal and
interfere as little as possible with ongoing adoption. If a Complete BIP is found to need substantial functional
changes, it may be preferable to move it to Closed[^new-BIP], and to start a new BIP with the changes instead.
Otherwise, it could cause confusion as to what being compliant with the BIP means.

> A BIP may remain in the Complete status indefinitely unless its authors decide to move it to Closed or it is advanced to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A BIP may remain in the Complete status indefinitely unless its authors or deputies decide to move it to Closed or it is advanced to
```
Seems more clear this way, even though technically it's already implied.

Deployed.
Complete is the final status for most successful Informational BIPs.

#### Deployed

> A settled[^settled] BIP may be advanced to Deployed upon request by any community member with evidence[^evidence] that the idea

Reviewer 6: Rather than just the word "settled" and a footnote explaining it, I would just remove the footnote and write what is meant. It seems essential for comprehension.

described in the BIP is in active use. Convincing evidence includes for example: an established project having deployed support
for the BIP in mainnet software releases, a soft fork proposal’s activation criteria having been met on the network, or
rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.

At that point, the BIP should be considered final and any breaking changes to the BIP should be proposed as a new
separate BIP.[^new-BIP]

##### Process BIPs

A Process BIP may change status from Complete to Deployed when it achieves rough consensus on the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. Such a
proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been open to discussion on the mailing list for at least

> one month, and no person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed or obstructive objections

Reviewer 6: Some of the lower quality proposals on the mailing list simply get ignored, though. In those cases a month is meaningless. Should there also be a bar of actually having received meaningful engagement?

may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. Deployed Process BIPs may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification has
rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

#### Closed[^closed]

A BIP that is of historical interest only, and is not being actively worked on, promoted or in active use, should be
marked as Closed. The reason for moving the
proposal to (or from) Closed should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.

> BIPs do not get deleted, they are retained even after being updated to Closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BIPs are not removed or deleted; they are retained even after being updated to Closed.
```

* BSL-1.0: [Boost Software License, version 1.0](http://www.boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt)

#### Not Acceptable Licenses

All licenses not explicitly included in the above lists are not acceptable terms for a Bitcoin Improvement Proposal.
However, BIPs predating the acceptance of this BIP were allowed under other terms, and should use these abbreviations
when no other license is granted:

* PD: Released into the public domain
* OPL: [Open Publication License, version 1.0](http://opencontent.org/openpub/)

## BIP Editors

The current BIP editors are:

* Bryan Bishop ([kanzure@gmail.com](mailto:kanzure@gmail.com))
* Jon Atack ([jon@atack.com](mailto:jon@atack.com))
* Luke Dashjr ([luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org](mailto:luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org))
* Mark "Murch" Erhardt ([murch@murch.one](mailto:murch@murch.one))
* Olaoluwa Osuntokun ([laolu32@gmail.com](mailto:laolu32@gmail.com))
* Ruben Somsen ([rsomsen@gmail.com](mailto:rsomsen@gmail.com))

### BIP Editor Responsibilities and Workflow

The BIP editors subscribe to the Bitcoin Development Mailing List and watch the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips).

> When a new BIP idea is submitted to the mailing list, BIP editors and other community members should comment in regard

Reviewer 6: With "BIP idea" do you mean the pre-BIP phase where the viability of the idea is being explored, or the phase where the author is ready to publish his first draft?

Perhaps both phases can be explicitly mentioned.

is also more likely to be retained by the community memory.

If the BIP needs more work, an editor should ensure that constructive, actionable feedback is provided to the authors
for revision. Once the BIP is ready it should be submitted as a "pull request" to the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) where it may get further feedback.

For each new BIP pull request that comes in, an editor checks the following:

* The idea has been previously discussed on the Bitcoin Development Mailing List
* Title accurately describes the content
* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one Bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backward Compatibility have been addressed
* Specification provides sufficient detail for implementation
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is ready: it is comprehensible, technically feasible, and all aspects are addressed as necessary

Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

A BIP editor will:

> * Assign a BIP number and BIP type in the pull request

Reviewer: I mildly wonder if people could use this section to argue that an editor must assign a number to a proposal that fulfills the list above while yet considered out of scope of the BIPs repository.

Author: Good point, I added "The described idea is on-topic for the repository" after the first point, and added a "Then, " before "a BIP Editor will".

* Ensure that the BIP is listed in the [README](README.mediawiki)
* Merge the pull request when it is ready

The BIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. The BIP editors monitor BIP
changes, and update BIP headers as appropriate.

BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly editorial changes to BIPs, such as

> correcting misspellings, fixing broken links, etc. as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correcting misspellings/grammar, fixing broken links, etc., as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the
```

original intent of the authors. Such a change must be recorded in the Changelog if it’s noteworthy per the criteria
mentioned in the [Changelog](#changelog) section.

## Backward Compatibility

### Changes from BIP 2

#### Workflow

- Status field values are reduced from nine to four:
  - Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn are gathered up into Closed.[^closed]
  - Final and Active are collapsed into Deployed.
  - Proposed is renamed to Complete.
  - The remaining statuses are Draft, Complete, Deployed, and Closed.
- The comment system is abolished.[^comments]
- A BIP in Draft or Complete status may no longer be closed solely on grounds of not making progress for three years.[^rejection]
  - A BIP in Draft status may be set to Closed by anyone if it appears to have stopped making progress for at least a
    year and its authors do not assert that they are still working on it when contacted.
  - Complete BIPs can only be moved to Closed by its authors and may remain in Complete indefinitely.
- Process BIPs are living documents that do not ossify and may be modified indefinitely.

> - Some judgment calls previously required from BIP Editors are reassigned either to the BIP authors or the repository’s

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Some judgment calls previously required from BIP editors are reassigned either to the BIP authors or the repository’s
```
Capitalization was inconsistent

  audience.

#### BIP Format

- The Standards Track type is superseded by the similar Specification type.[^standard-track]

> - Many sections are declared optional, it is up to the authors and audience to judge whether all relevant topics have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Many sections are declared optional; it is up to the authors and reviewers to judge whether all relevant optional topics have
```

Author: I took the semicolon and change to "reviewers, but the additional "optional" seems unnecessary: all relevant topics have to be addressed sufficiently, regardless whether the sections are optional or not.

  been comprehensively addressed and which topics require a designated section to do so.
- "Other Implementations" sections are discouraged.[^OtherImplementations]
- Auxiliary files are only permitted in the corresponding BIP’s subdirectory, as no one used the alternative of labeling
  them with the BIP number.
- Tracking of adoption, acceptance, and community consensus is out of scope for the BIPs repository, except to determine
  whether a BIP is in active use for the move into or out of the Deployed status.
- The distinction between recommended and acceptable licenses was dropped.
- Most licenses that have not been used in the BIP process have been dropped from the list of acceptable licenses.

#### Preamble

> - Comments-URI and Comment-Summary headers are dropped from the preamble.[^comments]

Reviewer: This comment and the next few harmonize the style in this section; you could choose to go with no quote-wrapping instead.

```suggestion
- The "Comments-URI" and "Comment-Summary" headers are dropped from the preamble.[^comments]
```

- The "Superseded-By" header is replaced with the "Proposed-Replacement" header.
- The "Post-History" header is replaced with the "Discussion" header.
- The "Discussions-To" header is dropped as it has never been used in any BIP.

> - Introduce Deputies and optional Deputies header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce Deputies and an optional "Deputies" header.
```

> - Titles may now be up to 50 characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The BIP "Title" header may now contain up to 50 characters (previously 44 in BIP 2).
```

> - Layer header is optional for Specification BIPs or Informational BIPs, as it does not make sense for all BIPs.[^layer]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The "Layer" header is optional for Specification BIPs or Informational BIPs, as it does not make sense for all BIPs.[^layer]
```

> - Rename "Author" field to "Authors".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rename the "Author" field to "Authors".
```

### Updates to Existing BIPs should this BIP be Activated

#### Previous BIP Process

> This BIP supersedes BIP 2 as the guideline for the BIP process.

Reviewer: nit, per the new terms used here

```suggestion
This BIP replaces BIP 2 as the guideline for the BIP process.
```

    This put an onus on the BIP authors, and frequently led to lingering pull requests due to the corresponding BIPs’
    authors no longer participating in the process. Many of these alternative implementations eventually became
    unmaintained or were low-quality to begin with. Therefore, "Other Implementations" sections are heavily discouraged.
[^complete]: **Why was the Proposed status renamed to Complete?**  
    Some reviewers of this BIP raised that in a process which outlines the workflow of Bitcoin Improvement _Proposals_
    using "Proposed" as a status field value was overloading the term: clearly _proposals_ are proposed at all stages of
    the process. "Complete" expresses that the authors have concluded planned work on all parts of the proposal and are
    ready to recommend their BIP for adoption. The term "ready" was also considered, but considered too subjective.
[^rejection]: **Why can proposals remain in Draft or Complete indefinitely?**  
    The automatic 3-year timeout of BIPs has led to some disagreement in the past and seems unnecessary in cases where

>     the authors are still active in the community and still consider their idea worth pursuing. On the other hand,

Reviewer: double "still"; consider s/are still active/remain active/

Author: went with "remain active" + "still consider"

>     Draft proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which should achieve the main goal of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Draft proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year, which should achieve the main goal of
```

("tested" also seems an odd word choice here)

Author: Changed to "Draft proposals that appear stale may be closed after only one year,…"

    the original rule by limiting the effort and attention spent on proposals that never reach Complete.
[^closed]: **Why was the Closed Status introduced?**  
    The Closed Status provides value to the audience by indicating which documents are only of historical significance.

>     Previously, the process had Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn which all meant some flavor of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Previously, the process had Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn, which all meant some flavor of
```

>     "work has stopped on this". The many statuses complicated the process, may have contributed to process fatigue, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "work has stopped on this." The many statuses complicated the process, may have contributed to process fatigue, and
```

Author: How American English places punctuation around subsentences will forever seem odd to me. ^^
